The theme of this program
is taken from the second part
of Romans 12:10:
“In showing honor to one another,
take the lead.”
What is honor?
In the Hebrew Scriptures,
the term translated “honor”
literally means “heaviness.”
So when we honor someone,
we’re acknowledging that he’s weighty
or that he amounts to something.
In the Greek Scriptures,
the word is related
to setting a price on something,
meaning that the one we honor
is esteemed or has value.
Whom should we honor?
Of course, Jehovah is worthy of honor.
Revelation 4:11 says this
and gives us the reason
for giving glory and honor to Jehovah.
It says because he “created all things.”
He is responsible
for us having life in the first place.
How do we give him honor?
There are many ways:
We honor him by doing his will
—obeying his laws and principles.
We honor him
by extolling his qualities and promises
—telling others
about these gifts from God.
We show him honor
by contributing financially
to the worldwide educational work
that he’s directing
through his Son and holy spirit.
And just as Revelation chapter 4 said
about Jehovah being worthy of the honor,
Revelation 5:12
says that his Son, Christ Jesus,
is worthy of the same.
Verse 12 says of Jesus:
“They were saying with a loud voice:
“‘The Lamb who was slaughtered
“‘is worthy to receive
the power and riches and wisdom
and strength and honor
and glory and blessing.’”
How do we show honor to Jesus?
One way is acknowledged
in the verse we just read.
He was “slaughtered”
like a sacrificial lamb
so that we might have the hope
of everlasting life.
We highly esteem,
and value, that sacrifice.
We honor Jesus
by recognizing his role
as an immortal
“King of kings” in the heavens.
And another
very practical way to honor Jesus
is to strive to imitate
his life and personality
as the model for us to follow closely.
If we take the lead in showing honor,
who else will we view
as highly valued
—to be treated with esteem?
Ephesians 6:1, 2 says
that children ‘honor their father and mother’
when they’re obedient to them.
Matthew 15:4-6
makes it clear that adult children
honor their parents and grandparents
by giving material assistance
to them as needed.
First Timothy 5:17
urges us to give elders “double honor”
because of their hard work in our behalf.
Romans 13:1, 7
even extends
the matter of showing honor
to governmental rulers
and others in authority.
First Peter 2:17
broadens the meaning
of honor even further saying:
“Honor men of all sorts.”
In addition to being kind
and respectful to people in general,
we also honor them
by being willing
to spend time
sharing the good news with them.
Ephesians 5:22-25
appeals to wives
to honor their husbands
by having Christlike subjection for them.
Husbands are to honor their wives
by showing them love
and treating them
just as Jesus treated the congregation.
And what about our theme text
for this discussion?
Who was Paul addressing
in Romans chapter 12 when he said:
“In showing honor to one another,
take the lead”?
Who are
the “one another” in that verse?
Look at Romans 1:7 with me.
Paul says he’s writing
“to all those who are in Rome
as God’s beloved ones,
called to be holy ones.”
So all of us
in the Christian congregation
are to have honor for each other.
I’d like to spend
the balance of my time
discussing two
of the many opportunities
we have to show honor
(they’re the last two
that I just referenced):
first, marriage mates
showing honor to each other,
and second, showing honor
to one another in our congregations.
Marriages in general today
are seriously lacking in honor.
Marriage mates
often demean one another
with harsh words
and disrespectful attitudes.
Some in the world resort
to physical violence,
as if that somehow
makes the abusive one right
in his view of whatever the issue is.
And infidelity on the part
of one or both mates is so common
it doesn’t even
raise eyebrows anymore.
All of this is a gross
lack of honor in marriage.
But what about marriages
of those professing
to be Jehovah’s Witnesses?
We’re blessed
with so many marriages
that are wholesome and honorable.
True, none are perfect.
But how blessed we are
to have the truth
and to have learned to be
more and more Christlike with each other.
We’ve learned to shed things
that we heard when we were growing up.
However, the matter
of honoring our marriage mate
needs to be discussed.
While relatively few of our marriages
end up with some kind
of physical violence
and relatively few
end up in divorce,
what about having honor
in the marriage?
After living together
as husband and wife
for many months
or for years or even for decades,
familiarity can cause us
to treat each other
with less respect or honor
than when we were courting.
That isn’t right.
It isn’t Christlike.
But with our inherited imperfection,
we may succumb
to dishonorable words and behavior
with the one
that we promised to treasure
“until death do us part.”
How can we get a grip
on this trait and minimize the times
that we have
a clash of spirit and words?
First, let’s consider
the two basic responsibilities
assigned to marriage mates.
This is the foundation
that we can then build on to improve.
The role of the husband
is clearly stated
at 1 Corinthians 11:3.
And while some wives in society
may bristle at this thought,
wives serving Jehovah
are to embrace this thought.
It’s the arrangement of God.
First Corinthians 11:3 says:
“But I want you to know
that the head of every man is the Christ;
“in turn, the head
of a woman is the man;
in turn, the head of the Christ is God.”
God’s Word says
that “the head of a woman is the man.”
However, the head of the woman
is not to be a domineering man,
not an abusive man
—verbally or physically.
He is to imitate his head.
And who is that?
What did the first part
of the verse say?
“The head
of every man is the Christ.”
In fact, Ephesians chapter 5
strikes this fine balance
between being a head of the wife
and being
a loving head like the Christ.
Ephesians 5:22, 23 says:
“Let wives be in subjection
to their husbands as to the Lord,
“[But what of the disposition
of the husband?]
“because a husband
is head of his wife
“just as the Christ
is head of the congregation,
he being a savior of this body.”
That verse says it all.
Verse 33 of the same chapter says this:
“Each one of you
must love his wife as he does himself;
“on the other hand,
the wife should have
deep respect for her husband.”
There’s nowhere in God’s Word
that says that if one mate
pushes the other mate’s button
—emotionally—
that it cancels
the offended mate’s obligation
to be Christlike.
The problem is that
when one mate is offended or hurt,
it’s so easy to roll the eyes in disgust
or to lash back with a verbal insult.
Then the other mate fires back
with another harsh, cutting remark.
It’s like wind on a forest fire.
Tempers blaze,
and the evening goes up in smoke.
It’s not at all Christlike.
There is no honor shown
in such a conflagration.
It has to stop sooner rather than later.
The January 15, 2015,
issue of The Watchtower said this:
“Remember that marriage
is not a competition
“to find out who is stronger,
who can shout louder,
“or who can think
of the most cutting remark.
“True, we all have flaws,
and sometimes we upset others.
“But there is never a justifiable reason
“for either a husband or a wife
“to use sarcastic and demeaning speech,
or worse, to shove or hit each other.”
How can we change the atmosphere?
Someone needs to put out the fire
with the water of God’s Word.
Romans 12:10b, again:
“In showing honor
to one another, take the lead.”
One of the mates must take the lead
even if at the time
they’re apologizing for their own behavior
by acknowledging that they
didn’t respond in a Christlike way saying,
“Forgive me.”
That same issue
of The Watchtower cited two scriptures:
one for the husband
and one for the wife.
We’ll first read Proverbs 17:27.
Husbands, listen to this
and apply it prior to a rift
or even during the conflict.
Proverbs 17:27:
“A man of knowledge
restrains his words,
and a discerning man will remain calm.”
Husbands, does that describe us?
Now wives,
please locate Proverbs 31:26.
Does this describe your speech
even when some altercation occurs?
Proverbs 31:26:
“She opens her mouth in wisdom;
the law of kindness is on her tongue.”
Usually after a misunderstanding
and rash words have been said,
we feel miserable and upset.
We often chastise ourselves
for adding fuel to the fire.
How much better
to train ourselves to restrain our words
and remain calm and to speak
in wisdom and with kindness of tongue.
Meet Emil and Firuca Gârbovan
from Romania.
They’re good examples
of how the power of God’s Word
can mold and change
the attitudes of marriage mates
who are willing to be guided by it.
It was in 1983 when I met Firuca.
I already had two little girls.
One was seven years old,
and the other one was three.
I accepted to study the Bible.
My husband worked
as a warrant officer for the police,
so at the beginning,
I studied in secret.
Then I decided to tell him the truth.
When I found out
that my wife was studying the Bible
in order to become
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
I became very sad.
And I realized that our marriage
and our family was in danger
because I only knew bad things
about Jehovah’s Witnesses.
He threatened
he would divorce me, and he did.
The divorce was
a very difficult time in my life
because I was seven months pregnant
with our third daughter.
Following the divorce, my husband
was given the house and custody
of our two daughters.
I had to leave the house,
and I stayed for almost a year
with two families of our brothers.
I saw Jehovah’s love toward me,
and I loved Jehovah very much,
but I loved my husband too.
One day, as I was walking
and holding the little girl’s hand,
I saw Firuca’s husband walking toward me.
My heart stopped,
and I said to myself,
‘He is going to hit me!’
But Emil was a gentleman.
And he took the little girl in his arms,
talked to her for a few minutes,
and then he put her back down and left.
When I saw him leaving, I thanked Jehovah
because he didn’t beat me.
In 1990, I looked for my wife
and I told her
that I would like to remarry her
to reunite our family.
And, after a while, she agreed
and step-by-step I started to study.
In 2003, I became
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I am very happy that I made this change,
and I regret that I didn’t do it sooner.
I personally saw
how the truth can change a person’s life,
even in my own family.
Currently, I serve as an elder.
And in 2010, I became a regular pioneer.
When I see Emil conduct
the Bible study next to me,
I feel like kneeling rather than standing
to thank Jehovah.
So to married couples
who love Jehovah we repeat:
“In showing honor . . . , take the lead.”
The principles just discussed
can also be applied
when showing honor
to others in the congregation.
Like the husband and wife
that we just discussed,
all of us should be improving
in imitating Jesus
and in ‘following his steps closely’
in all of our interactions
with fellow believers
in the congregation.
How do we show honor
to one another?
One way is well described
at 1 Corinthians 10:23, 24.
We show honor
when we put the other person’s feelings
and needs ahead of our own.
First Corinthians 10:23, 24:
“All things are lawful,
“but not all things are advantageous.
but not all things build up.
“Let each one keep seeking,
not his own advantage,
but that of the other person.”
We show honor
when we suppress our own rights.
What we do or say might be lawful,
but is it advantageous?
Will it build up?
Verse 24, then, concisely says it:
“Keep seeking,
not [our] own advantage [or right],
but that of the other person.”
We show honor to others
when we do good deeds for them.
Possibly, it’s even a humble task
that an elderly publisher needs done.
It could be offering to clean the house,
take them to the store,
or fill some other need.
The principle is at Luke 22:26:
“You, though,
are not to be that way.
“But let the one
who is the greatest among you
“become as the youngest,
and the one taking the lead
as the one ministering.”
Earlier, I cited 1 Timothy 5:17,
where we’re urged
to give elders “double honor”
because of their hard work in our behalf.
They’re also part
of our congregation and deserve honor.
In our August program last year,
Brother Lett helped us consider
much of what is involved.
You’ll recall that his subject was
“Appreciating Our ‘Gifts in Men.’”
We minister to or honor others
when we readily forgive them
if they’ve embarrassed us
or hurt our feelings.
Overall, Jehovah’s people do quite well
in honoring one another
in the congregation.
But here is the question:
Are we improving in this aspect
of our Christian personality?
In our theme scripture,
Paul didn’t just say
to honor one another.
He said to “widen out” or reach out
in this aspect of our Christian life.
His words were to “take the lead.”
If Paul had just said
to show honor to each other,
that would be like a teacher
urging a group
of literate students to learn to read.
If they’re literate,
they don’t need to learn to read.
But what might the teacher
be urging them to do?
He might encourage them
to read better, or to improve.
Love is the identifying mark
of Christ’s disciples.
So honor is something
we’ve learned to show.
However, like the teacher,
Paul is urging us
to improve in this area.
He said take the lead
in showing honor.
The footnote says
this could be rendered
taking the “initiative”
in showing honor.
Instead of waiting
for some obvious reason
to do good for others
—to commend someone,
to check on a shut-in—
look for opportunities
to take the initiative
to show honor in the family
and in our congregations.
Yes, “in showing honor . . . ,
take the lead”!